---
layout: post
title: Do not be Deceived (1 Corinthians 6:9–12)
date: 2021-10-27
categories: middle-school-youth
preview:
  My favorite type of movie is the con artist genre. In these types of films,
  the good guys are trying to pull off some major feat, and the whole plot
  revolves around them tricking the other person—deceiving them—into believing
  something that isn’t true.
---

> Or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not
> be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men
> who have sex with men nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers
> nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. And that is what some of you
> were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name
> of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.
>
> “I have the right to do anything,” you say—but not everything is beneficial.
> “I have the right to do anything”—but I will not be mastered by anything.
>
> — 1 Corinthians 6:9–12

# Deception

My favorite type of movie is the con artist genre. Probably the best known
modern examples are the Ocean’s 11 series, if any of you have seen those. In
these types of films, the good guys are trying to pull off some major feat,
typically to get revenge on a really evil person. Maybe they need to rob a
casino, steal something, or trap the bad person in the act of a crime. In any
case, the whole plot revolves around them tricking the other person—**deceiving
them**—into believing something that isn’t true. And usually with about 15
minutes to go it looks like the plan has completely fallen apart, but then a
giant twist is revealed to show that things are actually going exactly as
planned, and the whole thing was an elaborate deception. Tons of fun.

Deception is a common plot element in many books and movies.

- Star Wars: Senator Palpatine deceives the Galactic Republic to gain their
  trust, putting himself in a place of power, and only later reveals himself to
  be a Sith Lord, ruling over the galaxy with terror.

- Harry Potter: Tom Riddle deceives Harry into thinking he’s an honest, upright
  student, but in reality he’s He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named.

Now in all these examples, the good guys end up winning, and everybody lives
happily-ever-after, blah, blah, blah. But real life deception can have serious
consequences.

Anybody here ever heard the term “Ponzi scheme”? That’s basically a financial
deception that robs people of their life savings. Or especially in the past,
many people were deceived about the dangers of smoking, and now are inflicted
with lung cancer.

This passage is warning is against a specific deception. Look at verse 9 again:
“Do not be deceived”. The Bible doesn’t want you to be deceived about something.
And let me tell you: the specific deception that this passage is warning us
against is alive and well today, both outside and inside the church. Believing
in this deception can have disastrous consequences. Here is the deception:
“Wrongdoers will inherit the kingdom of God”. Do you believe that wrongdoers
will inherit in the kingdom of God? Then you are deceived, this passage says.

<!-- (3 ½ min; 3 ½ min total) -->

# The Gospel

So I want to take a step back as we get started. I need a volunteer. Now before
you volunteer, you need to know what you are volunteering for, because this is
going to take a bit of courage. I would like someone to come up here and explain
briefly to everyone what the Gospel is. Who is Jesus, what did he do, and how
are we saved from the penalty for the bad things we do?

_Have volunteer state the Gospel._

Great job! That is **the most** important message that you can hear and
understand. The Gospel is the good news that God the Father sent God the Son to
earth, that he lived a life of perfect obedience, and then died to pay the
penalty for sin. Not his own sin, since he had none, but our sin. And if anyone
believes in Christ, that person shall have eternal life.

So a few questions, and these are not trick questions:

- Can we earn our salvation by doing enough good deeds? _(No.)_
- Do we have to be “good enough” before God will forgive our sins? _(No.)_

All right, we’re off to a good start. Here’s a passage from another letter in
the Bible, 1 Timothy:

> Here is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance: Christ Jesus came
> into the world to save sinners—of whom I am the worst. (1 Timothy 1:15)

Whom did Christ come to save, according to this passage? _(sinners)_

Now, keep all of that in mind and look back at our passage for tonight. Do you
feel the tension then between this passage and what we just talked about? This
passage opens very plainly with, “wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of
God.” Which sounds very different than “Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners.” How do we affirm both of these things to be true? That’s the challenge
we want to consider tonight.

<!-- (3 minutes; 6 ½ minutes total) -->

# Disqualified

Paul lists a series of persons in this passage who are disqualified from
entering the kingdom of God. But I don’t want to get too hung up on the
specifics tonight. Because if you are like me, you probably tend to focus on the
sins that describe others, but not maybe aren’t the things that describe you.
That takes more courage.

To take just one example, we read there that “the greedy” will not inherit the
kingdom of God. Don’t say anything out loud, but think in your mind of someone
who is greedy....

Now, I don’t know who you thought of, but I bet is wasn’t yourself. Probably
someone wealthier than you are. And guess who they are thinking of? Someone
wealthier than they are. And so on and so on. By our own measurement, none of us
are greedy.

Is that the right measuring stick to use? Here’s a good working definition of
greed, from the dictionary: “a selfish and excessive desire for more of
something than is needed”. More money than we need, more food than we need, more
electronic devices than we need, more time in front of those electronic devices
than we need. Hmm … how are we doing now?

If we allow ourselves some self-examination, we will find that we all fall into
some of these things at times. Or take another similar passage, this one from
Galatians 5:

> The acts of the flesh are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity and debauchery;
> idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish
> ambition, dissensions, factions and envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. I
> warn you, as I did before, that those who live like this will not inherit the
> kingdom of God. (Galatians 5:19–21)

Same warning here: those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom of God.

Try that list on for size. Not only sexual immorality, but impurity. What have
you looked at on the internet? What do you talk about? Also: hatred and discord.
Ever been jealous? Or had a fit of rage? Been involved in dissension
(disagreement) or faction / cliques? How about selfish ambition? Here’s a test:
are you always trying to put yourself in the middle of everything by how you act
and speak? To make yourself the point. That’s selfish ambition.

The point is: none of us are complete strangers to these sins. And yet, the
Bible here says that such people will not inherit the kingdom of God. So, are we
all doomed? Is that the point of the message tonight? (That would be a downer of
a youth group.)

<!-- (3 ½ minutes; 10 minutes total) -->

# The Gospel transforms

There is certainly gospel hope, and the distinction between those who are saved
and those who are perishing is captured in a single word in our passage. Look
again at verse 11. “And that is what some of you ….” What’s the next word? WERE.
And quick English test: what tense is that? Past, present, or future? _(Past.)_

That’s the distinction. That is what some of you WERE, that’s that I WAS. But
now, in Christ, verse 11 says, “you were washed, you were sanctified, you were
justified”. Something changed.

You see, there are two different ways we can misunderstand the gospel. You can
fall off the horse in either direction. One error is to think we have to earn
forgiveness. To think we have to clean ourselves up first before God can forgive
us. That’s false. “God came to save sinners.” Your past sins don’t disqualify
you from becoming a Christian; they are precisely the thing that does qualify
you. So that’s one error we can fall into, and I want to be really clear tonight
about what the gospel is so that, even as we discuss a tough passage tonight,
none of us fall into that error.

But there’s another side we can err on, what has been called “easy believism”.
This is the false idea—the **deception**—that it is possible for someone to
become a Christian and then never have a shred of evidence of that faith. No
change whatsoever. The idea that, “Hey, I can pray a prayer, or raise my hand,
or whatever, and then I can live however I want to!”

And that’s a lie. When you come to faith in Christ, He always brings about
change in your life. Not necessarily immediately, but the trajectory of your
life changes. Those things no longer have mastery over you, they don’t get to
define who you are. Over time, you are putting behind sinful patterns, even as
you become more and more aware of how messed up you are.

So, suppose I was a greedy person before coming to Christ. That defined who I
was. Greed didn’t bother me, I found it a good motivator to get ahead in my job,
to make life more comfortable, to get what I want from others. And then God
saves me. After that, will I still struggle with greed? Yeah, probably, even for
a long time. But there will be increasing remorse when I give in to greed,
because I recognize it as disobedience to Jesus my master. Over time greed
should have less and less mastery over me. Christians struggle with sin, but it
doesn’t define who we are.

The same would be true of whatever sinful pattern has a hold on us.

- Are you an angry person? God desires to replace that with patience and
  self-control.
- Are you a person given over to lust? God desires to replace that with purity,
  with honoring others instead of objectifying them.
- Are you a person given over to selfish ambition, always wanting to draw
  attention to yourself? God wants to work in you humility.

I was trying to think of an illustration, and this one’s a little weird but hang
with me; hopefully it works. Do you all remember tiny little rubber toys you may
have had when you were little—or maybe last week, I’m not judging—that you place
into water and they grow up to like 20 times their original size? Like you start
out with this half-inch crab and then after it absorbs the water it’s like a
foot long?

It grows because it is immersed in the water. It can’t really help itself,
that’s what it does. That’s what saving faith is. The book of James will say,
“What good is it … if someone claims to have faith but has no deeds? Can such
faith save them? … Faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is
dead.” That’s not really faith. If I have that little half-inch crab five years
later and it is still a half-inch crab, it’s not going what it was meant to do.

You may have heard the motto in church, “Come as you are.” That’s fine as far as
it goes. All are welcome to come to Christ. You don’t need to be (in fact, you
can’t be) “good enough” before trusting in Jesus. So yes, “come as you are”.

But golly, don’t stay as you are. It is our hope that as you go through these
middle school years, and then immerge as young adults into your high school
years, that you will clearly hear God’s call on your life. Not only an initial
belief to trust in Jesus to forgive your sins, but also the Holy Spirit working
in each of you to put behind you patterns of disobedience and step into areas of
maturity and growth.

<!-- (6 minutes; 16 minutes total) -->
