---
layout: post
title: Don’t be a Jonah (Jonah 1–4)
date: 2010-05-02
categories: sermons
preview:
  In one sense, Jonah is pretty familiar. People otherwise ignorant of the Bible
  know about “Jonah and the whale”. And yet what people usually know about Jonah
  stops after chapter 2, maybe through chapter 3. This is a shame, because the
  key to the entire book is in the ending.
---

# Introduction

In one sense, Jonah is pretty familiar. People otherwise ignorant of the Bible
know about “Jonah and the whale”. And yet what people usually know about Jonah
stops after chapter 2, maybe through chapter 3. This is a shame, because the key
to the entire book is in the ending. Jonah is true history, but the account in
the Bible is also told in a masterful way. The author deliberately withholds key
information until the very end to maximize the teaching impact, to throw the
reader a twist, to maximize the shock value.

Like classic short stories—”The Open Window” by Saki, or “The Gift of the Magi”
by O. Henry (anyone remember those stories?)—or perhaps less classic but more
familiar—movies like The Sixth Sense or The Usual Suspects. Jonah uses similar
dramatic technique. The information revealed at the very end casts the events of
the previous chapters in an entirely different light, causing the reader to stop
and say, “I didn’t see that coming.” And to reflect, and learn.

OK, so let’s go through Jonah.

# Jonah 1:1-3

> The word of the LORD came to Jonah son of Amittai: “Get up! Go to the great
> city of Nineveh and preach against it, because their wickedness has confronted
> Me.” However, Jonah got up to flee to Tarshish from the LORD’s presence. He
> went down to Joppa and found a ship going to Tarshish. He paid the fare and
> went down into it to go with them to Tarshish, from the LORD’s presence.

Let’s stop right here and ask, “Why did Jonah flee?” The most common answer is
that he was afraid of the Ninevites. That seems reasonable, doesn’t it? God
Himself just said how wicked they were. Their cruelty was notorious. Nineveh was
part of the Assyrian empire. Historians note that the Assyrian army would do
things like erect pyramids of chopped-off heads in front of an enemy’s city, or
stack corpses of the dead like firewood at the gates of defeated cities. These
guys were bad news. In fact, there is an entire book of the Bible written to
condemn their wickedness. Really! The book of Nahum (although addressing a
slightly later time period) is entirely an oracle against Nineveh’s brutality
and wickedness. An excerpt:

> Woe to the city of blood, totally deceitful, full of plunder, never without
> prey. The crack of the whip and rumble of the wheel, galloping horse and
> jolting chariot! Charging horseman, flashing sword, shining spear; heaps of
> slain, mounds of corpses, dead bodies without end —they stumble over their
> dead. Because of the continual prostitution of the prostitute, the attractive
> mistress of sorcery, who betrays nations by her prostitution and clans by her
> witchcraft, I am against you —the declaration of the Lord of Hosts. (Nahum
> 3:1-5)

It would be entirely reasonable to conclude that Jonah refuses to go to Nineveh
because he fears for his safety. It would be entirely reasonable, but it would
also be entirely wrong. We’re told exactly why Jonah flees … at the end of the
story. Right now all we know is that that Jonah is disobedient. What is the
consequence of his disobedience? Let’s keep reading.

# Jonah 1:4-17

> Then the LORD hurled a violent wind on the sea, and such a violent storm arose
> on the sea that the ship threatened to break apart. The sailors were afraid,
> and each cried out to his god. They threw the ship’s cargo into the sea to
> lighten the load. Meanwhile, Jonah had gone down to the lowest part of the
> vessel and had stretched out and fallen into a deep sleep.
>
> The captain approached him and said, “What are you doing sound asleep? Get up!
> Call to your god. Maybe this god will consider us, and we won’t perish.”
>
> “Come on!” the sailors said to each other. “Let’s cast lots. Then we will know
> who is to blame for this trouble we’re in.” So they cast lots, and the lot
> singled out Jonah. Then they said to him, “Tell us who is to blame for this
> trouble we’re in. What is your business and where are you from? What is your
> country and what people are you from?”
>
> He answered them, “I am a Hebrew. I worship Yahweh, the God of the heavens,
> who made the sea and the dry land.”

Think about this. Jonah and these sailors are perishing out in the middle of
sea, their only hope being to reach dry land. And Jonah has just told them that
his God—the God he worships, the God whom he has disobeyed—is the One who made
the sea and the dry land. Almost certainly these sailors were syncretists—they
would have worshipped all kinds of gods, mashing them all together and trying to
appease whichever one they wanted to curry favor with at any given time. So when
Jonah tells them his God is the creator of the sea and dry land, their reaction
is understandable:

> Then the men were even more afraid and said to him, “What is this you’ve
> done?” For the men knew he was fleeing from the LORD’s presence, because he
> had told them. So they said to him, “What should we do to you to calm this sea
> that’s against us?” For the sea was getting worse and worse.
>
> He answered them, “Pick me up and throw me into the sea so it may quiet down
> for you, for I know that I’m to blame for this violent storm that is against
> you.” Nevertheless, the men rowed hard to get back to dry land, but they could
> not because the sea was raging against them more and more.
>
> So they called out to the LORD: “Please, Yahweh, don’t let us perish because
> of this man’s life, and don’t charge us with innocent blood! For You, Yahweh,
> have done just as You pleased.” Then they picked up Jonah and threw him into
> the sea, and the sea stopped its raging. The men feared the LORD even more,
> and they offered a sacrifice to the LORD and made vows.

As a consequence of his rebellion against Yahweh, Jonah finds himself in a world
of hurt. We’ll get more details as we go through chapter 2, but basically Jonah
is drowning.

**Jonah is disobedient > Jonah in distress**

And yet in his distress, Jonah cries out to the Lord (as we’ll see in chapter 2)
and what is the result? Verse 17:

> Then the LORD appointed a great fish to swallow Jonah, and Jonah was in the
> fish three days and three nights.

**Jonah is disobedient > Jonah in distress > God shows Jonah mercy**

# Jonah 2:1-10

What is Jonah’s reaction to God’s mercy? Understandably, it is gratitude and
praise. In the midst of the great fish, Jonah composes a psalm of praise to his
God:

> Jonah prayed to the LORD his God from inside the fish:
>
> I called to the LORD in my distress, and He answered me. I cried out for help
> in the belly of Sheol; You heard my voice. You threw me into the depths, into
> the heart of the seas, and the current overcame me. All Your breakers and Your
> billows swept over me. But I said: I have been banished from Your sight, How I
> will look once more toward Your holy temple? The waters engulfed me up to the
> neck; the watery depths overcame me; seaweed was wrapped around my head. I
> sank to the foundations of the mountains; the earth with its prison bars
> closed behind me forever! But You raised my life from the Pit, LORD my God! As
> my life was fading away, I remembered the LORD. My prayer came to You, to Your
> holy temple. Those who cling to worthless idols forsake faithful love, but as
> for me, I will sacrifice to You with a voice of thanksgiving. I will fulfill
> what I have vowed. Salvation is from the LORD!
>
> Then the LORD commanded the fish, and it vomited Jonah onto dry land.

Now, I know this is difficult to do, but try to imagine for a minute that you
don’t know the rest of the story. Try to put yourself in the position of the
original reader or hearer. Think about what you know up to this point:

**Jonah disobedient > Jonah in distress > God shows mercy > Jonah praises God**

It should be obvious how the story is going to proceed, right? Jonah has learned
his lesson, and will now submit joyfully to the ways of the Lord. Jonah will go
to disobedient Nineveh, God will display His grace toward them, and Jonah will
give thanks to God for showing the Ninevites the same grace that he (Jonah) was
shown, right? Of course, you know this is **not** how it ends, but it’s
important to consider Jonah’s actions so far, and especially his thanksgiving at
his own deliverance. We’ll come back to this later. Let’s continue the story.

# Jonah 3 / Sovereignty of God

> Then the word of the LORD came to Jonah a second time: “Get up! Go to the
> great city of Nineveh and preach the message that I tell you.” So Jonah got up
> and went to Nineveh according to the LORD’s command.

_So far so good, right?_

> Now Nineveh was an extremely large city, a three-day walk. Jonah set out on
> the first day of his walk in the city and proclaimed, “In 40 days Nineveh will
> be overthrown!” The men of Nineveh believed in God. They proclaimed a fast and
> dressed in sackcloth—from the greatest of them to the least.
>
> When word reached the king of Nineveh, he got up from his throne, took off his
> royal robe, put on sackcloth, and sat in ashes. Then he issued a decree in
> Nineveh:
>
> By order of the king and his nobles: No man or beast, herd or flock, is to
> taste anything at all. They must not eat or drink water. Furthermore, both man
> and beast must be covered with sackcloth, and everyone must call out earnestly
> to God. Each must turn from his evil ways and from the violence he is doing.
> Who knows? God may turn and relent; He may turn from His burning anger so that
> we will not perish.
>
> Then God saw their actions—that they had turned from their evil ways —so God
> relented from the disaster He had threatened to do to them. And He did not do
> it.

This is some serious repentance! From the greatest to the least, they are
expressing remorse with as much sincerity as they know how: fasting, turning
from their evil ways and violence, even putting sackcloth on their animals! I
mean, we can debate whether that was really necessary and what cultural thing
was going through their head, but the point is that they repent in earnest—they
believed God!

And—this is important—the Ninevites had **good theology** in terms of God’s
willingness to show mercy. This is bunny-trail, but an important one. Is there
any explicit mention of the possibility of mercy in Jonah’s message? Nope. How
about in chapter 1 or 3 when God is telling Jonah what to do? None! But the
Ninevites believed—correctly—that the very act of God announcing coming judgment
implicitly contains the possibility that they can even yet turn to God and be
shown mercy.

This demands that we pause at this point in the story and reflect on one of the
mega-themes in this book, and, indeed, in all of Scripture: the sovereignty of
God and how that sovereignty is exercised. It is unmistakable in this book.

Look at what has happened so far:

- (Jonah 1:4) God causes the storm
- (Jonah 1:7) God directs the lots _(Now there’s an interesting topic … maybe
  for after church discussions)_
- (Jonah 1:17) God appoints the fish to rescue Jonah
- (Jonah 2:10) God orders the fish to vomit Jonah
- (Jonah 4:6) God arranged for the plant
- (Jonah 4:7) God “appointed” the worm (same word as 1:17 when God appoints the
  fish)
- (Jonah 4:8) God appoints the scorching hot winds.

The book should cause us to glory in the sovereignty of God. Truly he can—and
does—work out all things for his glory and the good of those who love him.
Right? Romans 8:28, you know it:

> And we know that God causes all things to work together for good to those who
> love God, to those who are called according to His purpose.

His sovereignty knows no limits. It extends to all of creation—the elements of
nature obey him, the heavens declare his glory, he can arrange for an animal to
be in the exact location and do exactly as He pleases: to be a mode of transport
or even to speak if he chooses. His sovereignty extends into our very souls. We
just read about it in Romans; Philippians tells us that he is at work within us
both to will and work for His good pleasure. His rule is eternal—stretching from
decisions made before the foundation of the world, right through the time of
Jonah, right through the 21st century, through the appointed events of the end
times, and on into eternal state, forever and ever, Amen!

And yet, taking nothing away from that, we are not talking about deterministic
fatalism here: look at verse 10: “he changed his mind.”

This is not an isolated example. In fact, turn to Exodus 32, a passage that is
eerily similar to Jonah. This is a familiar passage—Moses has been talking with
God on Mount Sinai, receiving the Ten Commandments, and what is the nation of
Israel doing? Worshipping a golden calf. Starting at verse 7:

> The Lord spoke to Moses: “Go down at once! For your people you brought up from
> the land of Egypt have acted corruptly. They have quickly turned from the way
> I commanded them; they have made for themselves an image of a calf. They have
> bowed down to it, sacrificed to it, and said, ‘Israel, this is your God, who
> brought you up from the land of Egypt.’” The Lord also said to Moses: “I have
> seen this people, and they are indeed a stiff-necked people. Now leave Me
> alone, so that My anger can burn against them and I can destroy them. Then I
> will make you into a great nation.”
>
> But Moses interceded with the Lord his God: “Lord, why does Your anger burn
> against Your people You brought out of the land of Egypt with great power and
> a strong hand? Why should the Egyptians say, ‘He brought them out with an evil
> intent to kill them in the mountains and wipe them off the face of the earth’?
> Turn from Your great anger and relent concerning this disaster planned for
> Your people. Remember Your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel—You swore to
> them by Your very self and declared, ‘I will make your offspring as numerous
> as the stars of the sky and will give your offspring all this land that I have
> promised, and they will inherit it forever.’” So the Lord relented concerning
> the disaster He said He would bring on His people.

What’s going on here? What is going on is a very important principle concerning
God’s pronouncements of blessing and cursing. The principle is spelled out
explicitly in Jeremiah 18, the parable of the potter—a passage full of declaring
the sovereignty of God. Look at verses 7-10:

> At one moment I might announce concerning a nation or a kingdom that I will
> uproot, tear down, and destroy it. However, if that nation I have made an
> announcement about turns from its evil, I will relent concerning the disaster
> I had planned to do to it. At another time I announce that I will build and
> plant a nation or a kingdom. However, if it does what is evil in My sight by
> not listening to My voice, I will relent concerning the good I had said I
> would do to it.

This also applies at an individual level. Turn to Ezekiel 33, starting at verse
13:

> When I tell the righteous person that he will surely live, but he trusts in
> his righteousness and commits iniquity, then none of his righteousness will be
> remembered, and he will die because of the iniquity he has committed. So when
> I tell the wicked person: You will surely die, but he repents of his sin and
> does what is just and right—he returns collateral, makes restitution for what
> he has stolen, and walks in the statutes of life without practicing
> iniquity—he will certainly live; he will not die. None of the sins he
> committed will be held against him. He has done what is just and right; he
> will certainly live.

Don’t ask me how to make this into a coherent system because I can’t. I am
persuaded, however, that we must affirm all of what Scripture says even if we
don’t quite understand how it all fits together. Didn’t God already know that
Nineveh was going to repent? Yes, of course, we know that! In fact, didn’t God
already know that Israel was going to commit idolatry and that Moses was going
to intercede? Yes, of course, we know that too. Are we really supposed to be
asking those questions? Maybe there’s a time and place for that, but usually it
would seem that Scripture is content to leave the tension and force us to
wrestle with our personal response before a completely sovereign and holy God.

That God should choose to place the option of obedience and disobedience before
the nations—indeed, before individuals—does not limit His sovereignty. It does
not make God dependent upon man; it makes man dependent upon God, which brings
Him glory.

That was somewhat of a bunny-trail, but I think a relevant and fair one. It is a
theme that the author Jonah is clearly trying to teach. The language of God
orchestrating all the dramatic events of the book in his sovereignty is
unmistakable. And yet, the story pivots on the repentance of the Ninevites as
they turn to God and allow Him to demonstrate his grace and mercy.

The Ninevites understood this—that God, in His sovereignty, is always willing to
show mercy. And, as we will see next, Jonah understood it as well. The
difference is that the Ninevites embraced it as a good thing. And Jonah hated
it—at least, when applied to his enemies.

You see, Nineveh has followed through the exact same stages as Jonah:

**Jonah disobedient > Jonah in distress > God shows mercy > Jonah praises God**

**Nineveh disobedient > Nineveh in distress > God shows mercy > ???**

After what Jonah has just been through, it is obvious how the story will end
right?

# Jonah 4:1-4

> But Jonah was greatly displeased and became furious.

This language used here in the translation isn’t nearly strong enough. I can’t
read a line of Hebrew, but from what I gather from trustworthy scholars, the
Hebrew used here is about as strong as you can get to express disgust. We might
say, “This was absolutely disgusting to Jonah; it made him sick.” He is angry
and disgusted by God’s actions. It’s meant to be shocking. Why was Jonah angry?
Is it because he’s embarrassed that he delivered a message of judgment that
never come to pass? No; keep reading—it gets worse:

> But Jonah was greatly displeased and became furious. He prayed to the LORD:
> “Please, LORD, isn’t this what I said while I was still in my own country?
> That’s why I fled toward Tarshish in the first place. I knew that You are a
> merciful and compassionate God, slow to become angry, rich in faithful love,
> and One who relents from sending disaster. And now, LORD, please take my life
> from me, for it is better for me to die than to live.” The LORD asked, “Is it
> right for you to be angry?”

Why did Jonah flee from God in the first chapter, third verse? Was it because he
feared the Ninevites? No. Was it because he had a faulty view of the character
of God? No again. The scandal is that Jonah ran away precisely because he had a
**correct** understanding of the merciful and compassionate nature of God, and
he hated it. He was a racist. Oh, it was OK for God to show mercy and withhold
His wrath from Israel. And it was OK for God to show mercy to him after he
disobeyed. But not the Ninevites! God can’t possibly be on **their** side! Jonah
hated the Ninevites and desired to see them suffer and die under the wrath of
Yahweh. Jonah knew what the Ninevites knew—that implicit in any message of
judgment is the possibility of repentance—and he didn’t want them to have that
opportunity!

**Nineveh disobedient > Nineveh in distress > God shows mercy > Jonah angry**

With this information, the whole story “clicks”. The previous chapters,
particularly Jonah’s thankful heart in the fish, are seen in an entirely
different light. Chapter 2, thought by many to be a highlight, is in fact a low
point. Jonah is perfectly willing to receive God’s mercy himself, but can’t
stomach the thought of it being extended to his enemies. That’s why he fled from
God.

Now before we’re too hard on Jonah, let’s look at our own history. It’s common
for us to presume God to be on our side and against our enemies. Read diaries
from the civil war: both sides slaughtering hundreds of thousands of their
brothers, all the while fully persuaded that theirs was the just cause and that
God was fighting on their side. It’s insanity. Or the Revolutionary War—we all
know that God was for the Americans, right? Or that God loves capitalism but
hates communism. Or God is for Republicans but against Democrats. I’m just
saying, be careful with Jonah. “In the same way you judge others you will be
judged, and by your standard of measure it will be measured back to you.” We’ll
talk more about application in a minute; let’s finish the book.

# Jonah 4:5-11 / Application

It’s time for God to teach Jonah a lesson.

> Jonah left the city and sat down east of it. He made himself a shelter there
> and sat in its shade to see what would happen to the city. Then the LORD God
> appointed a plant, and it grew up to provide shade over Jonah’s head to ease
> his discomfort. Jonah was greatly pleased with the plant. When dawn came the
> next day, God appointed a worm that attacked the plant, and it withered.
>
> As the sun was rising, God appointed a scorching east wind. The sun beat down
> on Jonah’s head so that he almost fainted, and he wanted to die. He said,
> “It’s better for me to die than to live.”
>
> Then God asked Jonah, “Is it right for you to be angry about the plant?”
>
> “Yes,” he replied. “It is right. I’m angry enough to die!”
>
> So the LORD said, “You cared about the plant, which you did not labor over and
> did not grow. It appeared in a night and perished in a night. Should I not
> care about the great city of Nineveh, which has more than 120,000 people who
> cannot distinguish between their right and their left, as well as many
> animals?”

The lesson of the plant provokes the exact same reaction in Jonah that he showed
throughout the rest of the story: self-absorption. Jonah displays great
affection for the plant that gives him comfort, and incredible anger when it is
removed. Meanwhile, the souls of 120,000 people are in the balance, and Jonah
couldn’t care less. In fact, he wishes their suffering. It’s a lesson about how
one’s self-absorption can lead to incredibly warped priorities and imbalanced
concerns. We might call it tunnel-vision. An insignificant plant consumes the
emotions of Jonah, and he is deaf to the souls in Nineveh.

The application of the book is pretty simple: “Don’t be a Jonah.” We all have a
little Jonah in us; it’s very easy for us to become consumed in our own little
worlds. I’ll speak for myself. Like Jonah, I find it relatively easy to be
grateful for the good things God has done for me—my salvation, my family,
health, my house, my car, job going well, financial stability, etc. But as soon
as things go bad in my personal world, I can get angry. Maybe even small things
… and I’m irritable, sometimes even angry with God, “What did you make this
happen?! Can’t it just be fixed already?!” I know it sounds stupid, but I’m just
saying, it’s my natural tendency, and I suspect we can all relate to some
degree.

Please don’t misunderstand me. I’m **not** saying that it’s wrong for us to give
thanks for the spiritual and physical abundance we enjoy—for the big things and
for the little things. It was a good thing for Jonah to thank the Lord for his
deliverance in the fish. It’s a good thing for us to praise God for our
deliverance. It was a good thing for him to take delight in the plant which gave
him comfort. It is a good thing for us to thank God for the blessings He gives
to us. James tells us that “Every good thing given and every perfect gift is
from above…” (James 1:17)

But when I am unable to find similar concern for others, I have gone seriously
astray.

Am I praying as fervently for others as I am for myself? For my family, for my
governing authorities, for the leaders in the church, for those in the body who
are suffering, for my enemies? Am I showing concern in tangible ways—showing
hospitality, spending time, listening?

See, when all is said and done, what is the message of Jonah? Surprise,
surprise: love your neighbor—love your enemies—as much as you already love
yourself. Imagine that. I know we’ve heard it over and over and over again, but
we need to. Instead of focusing inward on our own problems, and being thankful
only for our own blessings, may our thoughts be aligned with the thoughts of
God, who desires to show his compassion and mercy to all, even the wicked. In
fact, God seems to delight especially in showing mercy to the wicked, to those
we would mostly consider to be outside the possibility of grace, like the great
city of Nineveh with 120,000 people in spiritual darkness … or the great cities
of Los Vegas / New Orleans … or Cuba … or Iraq … or those crazy corrupt
politicians … or whomever you consider to be your enemy.

I’ll conclude with a quote from a commentary on Jonah, which I think captures
the message well:

> Every hearer / reader may have some Jonah in him or her. All need to reflect
> on the questions God asks, including the final, specific, “Should I not spare
> Nineveh?” (4:11). Anyone who replies “Why is that such an important question?”
> has not understood the message. Anyone who replies “No!” has not believed
> it.[^1]

Actually, I lied. I’ll conclude with an even better quote about the message in
the book of Jonah. I think you’ll recognize the author.

> You have heard that it was said, ‘YOU SHALL LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR and hate your
> enemy.’ But I say to you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute
> you, so that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven; for He causes
> His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and
> the unrighteous. For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have?
> Do not even the tax collectors do the same? If you greet only your brothers,
> what more are you doing than others? Do not even the Gentiles do the same?
> Therefore you are to be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. (Matthew
> 5:43-48)

{% include footnote-break.html %}

[^1]:
    Douglas Stuart, Word Biblical Commentary: Hosea–Jonah, ed. Bruce M. Metzger
    (Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1987), 435
