---
layout: post
title: Adultery and Lust (Proverbs 5)
date: 2020-11-01
categories: high-school-youth
preview:
  The lips of the adulterous woman drip honey, and her speech is smoother than
  oil; but in the end she is bitter as gall, sharp as a double-edged sword.
---

# Context and the centrality of the gospel

> My son, pay attention to my wisdom, turn your ear to my words of insight, that
> you may maintain discretion and your lips may preserve knowledge. For the lips
> of the adulterous woman drip honey, and her speech is smoother than oil; but
> in the end she is bitter as gall, sharp as a double-edged sword. Her feet go
> down to death; her steps lead straight to the grave. She gives no thought to
> the way of life; her paths wander aimlessly, but she does not know it.
> (Proverbs 5:1–6)

Let’s get a couple of things established right from the start so that we stay on
the right path.

First, let’s be clear on we **are** talking about tonight and what we are
**not** talking about. This passage is written from the perspective of a father
instructing his son. And as we’ll see throughout the chapter, this son is
apparently married. Right off the bat then, we’ve got a couple of challenges.
First is that, to the best of my knowledge, none of you are married. So,
strictly speaking, the sin of adultery _per se_ isn’t really in play. But we
**can** abstract that to the issue of lust. Jesus taught that “big sins” like
adultery and murder are ultimately heart issues. He said,

> “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’ But I tell
> you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery
> with her in his heart.” (Matthew 5:27-28)

That’s really going to be our focus then tonight. That’s the first issue to
contextualize.

The second is this is a **son** who is receiving the instruction and so this
passage frames the female as the tempter / the adulteress; and the male as the
one being tempted and falling into sin. But let’s recognize that these things
cut both ways. Lust is not uniquely a man’s vice; it is an issue that women
struggle with as well. And temptation is initiated by both females and males.
So, recognize that this passage is coming from one point of view, but let’s get
beyond stereotypes and do the hard work of seeing how this applies to our lives
personally.

Final foundational issue before we get started into the text, and this one is
really important, so please listen. If you hear nothing else tonight, this is
the part I want you to hear.

I am looking at a room full of broken people—students and leaders, myself
included. And that brokenness for many of us involves issues regarding our
sexuality. We’ve messed up the past. We’re messing up right now. Listen to me:
Jesus said that he came “to seek and save the lost.” That’s us: the lost. He
knows your past, and he knows your present, and he loves you. “While we were
still sinners Christ died for us.” Let’s not lose sight of the gospel as we go
through this passage.

Here’s the tension we’re wrestling with as we go through this. Broadly speaking,
we have two types of people in this room today. Some of you think none of this
is a big deal. Lust, pornography, sending inappropriate photos, sexual
experimentation … no big deal. Your inclination is to hear what I just said and
conclude, “See, it doesn’t really matter. I’m forgiven anyway.” That’s called
cheap grace and it’s the coward’s way out.

The Bible calls out sin, and—in this passage specifically—sexual sin. And there
are consequences for sin—this passage will focus on that as well. And so it
would be irresponsible not to press into that as we’re studying through.

Others, however, already feel a sense of shame and regret when we come to topics
like this and your inclination might be to hear only more guilt and shame and
hopelessness. And if so, then I have completely failed at what I’m trying to
communicate tonight.

So everyone needs to be a little honest with themselves at this point and hear
the full picture, especially that angle that you might not be inclined to hear.
I want us to feel the weight of what this passage is teaching, and how it
applies to current culture. But feeling that weight that should cause us to run
**towards** Christ not away from him.

<!-- (5 min; 6.5 min total) -->

# The allure of lust

So our first point is the allure of lust. Verse 3 notes that “the lips of the
adulterous woman drip honey and her speech is smoother than oil”. We sin because
sin is pleasurable, at least in the short term. Lust promises that pleasure, but
it’s an empty promise. It’s a short-term play, indulging a moment of passion and
emotion rather than what is in our best interests in the long term.

I don’t think this is necessarily intentional, but it made me chuckle how this
passage starts with an implore for the son to pay attention! And then in verse 7
again, “Now then, my sons, listen to me!” That struck me as funny because I can
imagine Solomon having this conversation with his son, talking about lust, when
an attractive woman walks by, and Solomon’s like, “Hey! Eyes up here boy! Pay
attention to **my** wisdom! Listen to me!” Sexual attraction can be very
distracting. One of those things where, yeah, we know in our heads maybe what
the right thing is, but then we lose our minds a little around certain people.

And can I say this right now? That’s not necessarily a bad thing. There’s a
God-designed aspect to attraction. All of that biology, hormones, and
stuff—that’s designed by our creator. We’ll read a little later in this chapter
some things that might make us blush. That’s not what the Bible is warning
against.

What God is warning us about is where those natural impulses are taken in a
direction that takes us away from love of God and/or love of others, or when
they are awakened outside of their proper time. And that might be a helpful, if
simplistic way of discerning the difference between lust and love. Lust is
always self-focused. What am **I** going to get out of this? How does this
fulfill **my** wants? It leads to the objectification of other people. Love is
concerned with the well-being, the wholeness, and flourishing of the other
person.

I want us to be real about the pressure of temptation here. This has always been
a struggle, but I think I can say without risk of contradiction that the
temptation is higher now because of the availability of pornography and the way
it is marketed to our culture. I mean, back in this day, this was literally a
prostitute on the corner. There was a certain amount of public risk that one
took meeting up and, if I can put it this way, inconvenience. Now it’s available
24/7 in at least the illusion of privacy—we’ll talk about that a bit later.

And it’s big, **big** business. One study estimates that the pornography
industry is a $12 billion (with a “b”) a year industry. That’s $380 every
second. Or, to put it another way, from the time we started youth group tonight
until we are done, nearly $2.75 million in revenue. That kind of money attracts
a lot of marketing experts. So if you are struggling with pornography and you
feel like everything is conspiring against you—the advertisements you see, and
the messaging you hear, and the feeds you get and the way innocent searches
often lead you down a path to something more questionable, the feeling is real.
There’s a strategy behind a lot of that that has been devised by middle-aged
executives in a boardroom using PowerPoint slides, figuring out the most
effective ways to monetize your lust. And a lot of that is keeping this promise
reinforced—the messages that drip honey and are smooth as oil.

<!-- (6 min; 12.5 min total) -->

# The consequences of lust

Let’s keep reading verses 7 through 14:

> Now then, my sons, listen to me; do not turn aside from what I say. Keep to a
> path far from her, do not go near the door of her house, lest you lose your
> honor to others and your dignity to one who is cruel, lest strangers feast on
> your wealth and your toil enrich the house of another. At the end of your life
> you will groan, when your flesh and body are spent. You will say, “How I hated
> discipline! How my heart spurned correction! I would not obey my teachers or
> turn my ear to my instructors. And I was soon in serious trouble in the
> assembly of God’s people.”

This passage warns that there are consequences to indulging our lust. Now, I’ll
be honest, when I first read this I thought, “This is a bit dramatic, isn’t it?”
I mean, loss of honor and dignity? Financial ruin? Note from verse 14 that this
is all public—in the assembly of the people is where this humiliation is taking
place.

But then I thought, “No, this happens today too.” Every year or so it makes big
news because it concerns some scandal with a famous celebrity or politician. A
few years ago, it was Bill Cosby. Now, that name might not mean anything to most
of you, or if you do know that name it’s associated with him being a sexual
predator. And that’s kind of my point. To my generation, Bill Cosby was the
epitome of wholesomeness. Brilliant comedian. But all of that is essentially
wiped away because of sexual deviance of his that was exposed.

The whole “me too” movement exposed a lot of the sexual abuse in Hollywood and
elsewhere and brought a lot of people the type of loss of honor and dignity and
ruin that these verses describe. And this isn’t a problem “out there”. The list
of pastors and youth leaders and church volunteers who have been exposed in
inappropriate relationships or pornography addictions is horrific.

“Yeah,” you might say, “but those are extreme examples. Nothing like that is
going to happen to me just from experimenting sexually as a teen or by consuming
pornography.”

Maybe. But two things I’d caution us to consider.

The first is that things which we intend to be private have a way of becoming
public. There was this website, several years back, the purpose of which was to
connect people together who were interested in having an extramarital affair. In
2015 that site was hacked, and all of their user profile information posted
publicly on the internet. As you can imagine, that led to a lot of broken
marriages, children who were caught in the middle of this, people getting fired
from their jobs; there were several suicides linked to that data leak. I think
we all can think of examples where someone sent a sexually explicit photo to
someone, supposedly “securely and privately”, that ended up getting shared. Or a
decision to “go too far” in a moment of passion that later you regret, but
people are whispering. The word got out. And that can bring a lot of shame and
hurt. So that’s the first warning: things which we intend to be private have a
way of becoming public. If you wouldn’t want something to be broadcast to the
world, don’t do it. Don’t share it. Don’t post it. The privacy you think you
have on the internet is largely an illusion. But that’s a discussion for another
time.

The second caution is that patterns we establish now have a way of changing us
and making certain things easier and harder for us later in life. I’m certainly
no psychology expert, but they have been able to demonstrate fairly
conclusively, for example, that regular consumption of pornography rewires the
brain. It essentially makes those paths “easier to travel” if you will, which in
turn makes it harder to find joy and satisfaction in the things that we are
intended to. Now, am I saying that everyone who views porn or experiments
sexually as a teen is destined to grow up to be an adulterer or sexual predator?
No. I am NOT saying that. But what I am saying is it can have long-term effects
that rob us of future joy.

Maybe this is a better way of putting this: When we talk about issues of
sexuality and the Bible, I think we often perceive of it as God is just imposing
these arbitrary rules that are there to make us miserable. That’s not the case.
God is **for** your flourishing; he just knows better than you do. And he knows
that the path of lust is not going to help us live the abundant life he intends
for us.

<!-- (7.5 min; 20 min total) -->

# God’s better plan

Which leads into the next section. Let’s read verses 15 through 20 and keep in
mind this is written to the teacher’s son, who is **married**:

> Drink water from your own cistern, running water from your own well. Should
> your springs overflow in the streets, your streams of water in the public
> squares? Let them be yours alone, never to be shared with strangers. May your
> fountain be blessed, and may you rejoice in the wife of your youth. A loving
> doe, a graceful deer—may her breasts satisfy you always, may you ever be
> intoxicated with her love. Why, my son, be intoxicated with another man’s
> wife? Why embrace the bosom of a wayward woman?

The Bible, ladies and gentlemen…

Ok, so this isn’t “that talk” tonight. We’ll leave that for another evening.
When someone else is teaching. So what do we do with this?

I would say the principle we can take out of this context and generalize is the
necessity of replacing lust with finding fulfillment in something else,
something good. Now, to someone who is married, part of that is going to be
loving your spouse. Keep the home fires burning. If this were a marriage
conference, we could spend quite a long time on verses like this. But that’s not
your context, so tuck that away for a future day if you like, but that’s not
going to help right now.

We can direct our energy to other passions—hobbies, sports, community service,
relationships that are built around something other than physical contact. Those
can certainly help. Few things are more dangerous for temptation than boredom.
So you know, get a job, work out, set some goals.

But the most effective way, and the one that is going to be constant, is a deep
relationship with Jesus Christ. I read one author once who put it “fight lust
with lust”. Not another worldly lust, but a drive to know Jesus. To hunger and
thirst for righteousness, as another passage would put it. **That** most
effectively is where you will find fulfillment. Whether you are married or not.
He changes our very desires themselves so that our ambition looks towards more
meaningful and eternal things rather than our focus being consumed with
temporary passions that are without meaning.

<!-- (4 min; 24 min total) -->

# Practical strategies

Last section is verses 21 through 23:

> For your ways are in full view of the Lord, and he examines all your paths.
> The evil deeds of the wicked ensnare them; the cords of their sins hold them
> fast. For lack of discipline they will die, led astray by their own great
> folly.

Last thing to mention here, is how do we battle the temptation towards lust? And
this passage lays out two primary ways which I’ll just mention briefly here and
then this would be a good thing to tease out in small group.

First strategy is to have a big view of God. Notice in verse 21 the reminder
that everything we do is in full view of the Lord. It’s not secret, even if we
are successful at hiding it from others. And flouting our sexual sins before the
eyes of a holy God is not a wise thing. Violating his design for our lives has a
way of bringing pain upon ourselves. These verses talk about our evil deeds
ensnaring us and hold us fast, leading us down paths that lead to sorrow not
flourishing.

The second strategy is back in verse 8. Want to avoid being tempted by the
prostitute on the corner? Don’t go near that corner! Now that’s going to look a
lot different in our contexts but if you know you are struggling in this area,
what are some practical actions you can take? Apps to uninstall? Accountability
to pursue? Leaving your phone to charge overnight in the living room instead of
having it with you overnight? What might that look like? We all have feet of
clay here, guys.

I want to finish with a reminder of something I said in the beginning. We need
to take these things seriously, but the gospel is bigger.

So, this is not my illustration, I read it somewhere else and maybe you’ve seen
it before, but I think it is helpful to think about as we close. I have here a
$10 bill. Straight from the bank. Crisp and clean. Now who would want this?

_(Rub in dirt, step on it, wrinkle it up, etc.)_

OK, now who would want **this**!? Yeah, we would all still want it, because the
value of the $10 bill is inherent in its design and backed by the authority of
the US Government. The condition of the bill is quite irrelevant. Just based on
raw statistics alone, I am confident that there is a lot of brokenness in this
room in the area of our sexuality and lust. We’re dirty, we’re crumpled. “While
we were still sinners, Christ died for us.” Our value is based on our identity
as being made in the image of God. Nothing changes that. Christ died to heal us
from our brokenness. He knows us urges us to come to him, all of us who are
weary and heavy-burdened, to find rest for our souls. If we are feeling the
Spirit’s conviction of sin, let us not feel shame, but run to him.

<!-- (5 min; 29 min total) -->

{% include footnote-break.html %}

# Discussion questions for leaders

- In light of what this chapter is about, what do you think it means in verse 2
  that wisdom enables us to “maintain discretion” and “preserve knowledge”?

- This passage warns against “the adulterous woman” and avoiding “the door of
  her house”. What are the sources of sexual temptation that we and our students
  face today? What are some of the “outlets” in which youth sinfully indulge
  their sexual lust? (Ex. “sexting”)

- What are some of the consequences of adultery listed in this passage? Why do
  you think these warnings are so severe?

- What are the metaphors in verses 15-19 referring to? How would you
  contextualize this when teaching students?

- How would you explain to a young adult the difference between physical
  attraction and lust?

- Please watch this short clip (4 minutes):
  [Matt Chandler - Jesus Wants the Rose](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bLgIecL1IdY).
  How does the truth emphasized in that clip play into the conversations we
  might be having in small group?

- What are some practical steps we can take to honor God in our relationships
  and avoid lust and temptation?

# Discussion questions for students

- In what ways is lust described in the passage tonight as deceptive and
  destructive?

- What would it look like in our culture to “keep to a path far from [the
  adulterous woman], do not go near the door of her house”? In other words, what
  are some practical steps we can take to minimize temptation?

- Read Matthew 5:27-30. Are these words to be taken literally? If not, what do
  they mean, and what would that look like in our lives?

- Some who are married follow what has come to be known as “the Billy Graham
  rule” which seeks to avoid any situation that would have even the appearance
  of compromise or suspicion. This includes refusing to travel, meet, or eat
  alone with a person of the opposite sex other than his or her spouse. Some
  view this as wise, while others criticize the rule as being sexist and
  legalistic. What do you think?

- Do you know of peers who wrap up their sense of worth and identity in having a
  dating relationship? What problems can that cause?

- What are some practical steps we can take to honor God in our relationships?

- Many in our culture would say that sexual intimacy isn’t necessarily something
  that has to be reserved until marriage. Do you agree or disagree? Why? If you
  disagree, how would you support your position with Scripture?

- Read 1 Corinthians 13:4-6. Based on that definition, what would it look like
  to “love” someone in whom you are romantically interested?
